docs: explain pre-request postgrest (#20217)
supabase/supabase: apps/docs/pages/guides/api/securing-your-api.mdx

}

The data APIs are designed to work with Postgres Row Level Security (RLS). If you use [Supabase Auth](/docs/guides/auth), you can restrict data based on the logged-in user.

To control access to your data, you can use [Policies](/docs/guides/auth#policies).

## Enabling row level security

> Any table you create in the `public` schema will be accessible via the Supabase Serverless API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any table you create in the `public` schema will be accessible via the Supabase Data API.
```

>
<TabPanel id="dashboard" label="Dashboard">

1. Go to the [Authentication > Policies](/dashboard/project/_/auth/policies) page in the Dashboard.
2. Select **Enable RLS** to enable Row Level Security.

</TabPanel>
<TabPanel id="sql" label="SQL">

```sql
ALTER TABLE

>   todos ENABLE ROW LEVEL SECURITY;

Author: I never know honestly 😂 I like lowercase but keep seeing uppercase in docs sometimes

>   todos ENABLE ROW LEVEL SECURITY;

Author: Done

The expected value for `useconfig` should be:

```javascript
;['session_preload_libraries=supautils, safeupdate']
```

## Enforce additional rules on each request

Using Row Level Security policies may not always be adequate or sufficient to protect APIs.

Some of the most common situations when this is necessary are:

- Enforcing per-IP or per-user rate limits.
- Checking custom or additional API keys before allowing further access.
- Rejecting requests after exceeding a quota or requiring payment.
- Disallowing direct access to certain tables, views or functions in the `public` schema.

You can build these cases in your application by creating a Postgres function that will read information from the request and perform additional checks, such as counting the number of requests received or checking that an API key is already registered in your database before serving the response.

Define a function like so:

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION public.check_request()
  RETURNS VOID
  LANGUAGE plpgsql
  SECURITY DEFINER
  AS $$
BEGIN
  -- your logic here
END;
$$;
```

> And register it to run on every serverless API request using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And register it to run on every Data API request using:
```

```sql
ALTER ROLE authenticator
  SET pgrst.db_pre_request = 'public.check_request';
```

> This configures the `public.check_request` function to run on every serverless API request. To have the changes take effect, you should run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configures the `public.check_request` function to run on every Data API request. To have the changes take effect, you should run:
```

```sql
NOTIFY pgrst, 'reload config';
```

Inside the function you can perform any additional checks on the request headers or JWT and raise an exception to prevent the request from completing. For example, this exception raises a HTTP 402 Payment Required response with a `hint` and additional `X-Powered-By` header:

```sql
RAISE sqlstate 'PGRST' USING
  message = json_build_object(
    'code',    '123',
    'message', 'Payment Required',
    'details', 'Quota exceeded',
    'hint',    'Upgrade your plan')::text,
  detail = json_build_object(
    'status',  402,
    'headers', json_build_object(
      'X-Powered-By', 'Nerd Rage'))::text;
```

When raised within the `public.check_request` function, the resulting HTTP response will look like:

```http
HTTP/1.1 402 Payment Required
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
X-Powered-By: Nerd Rage

{
  "message": "Payment Required",
  "details": "Quota exceeded",
  "hint": "Upgrade your plan",
  "code": "123"
}
```

> Please look into using [JSON operator functions](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/functions-json.html) to build rich and dynamic responses from exceptions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the [JSON operator functions](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/functions-json.html) to build rich and dynamic responses from exceptions.
```

```

The `private` schema is used as it cannot be accessed over the API!

Create the `public.check_request` function:

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION public.check_request()
  RETURNS VOID
  LANGUAGE plpgsql
  SECURITY DEFINER
  AS $$
DECLARE
  req_method text := current_setting('request.method', true);
  req_ip inet := split_part(
    current_setting('request.headers', true)::json->>'x-forwarded-for',
    ',', 1)::inet;
  count_in_five_mins integer;
BEGIN
  IF req_method = 'GET' OR req_method = 'HEAD' OR req_method IS NULL THEN
    -- rate limiting can't be done on GET and HEAD requests
    RETURN;
  END IF;

  SELECT
    count(*) INTO count_in_five_mins
  FROM private.rate_limits
  WHERE
    ip = req_ip AND request_at BETWEEN now() - interval '5 minutes' AND now();

  IF count_in_five_mins > 100 THEN
    RAISE sqlstate 'PGRST' USING
      message = json_build_object(
        'message', 'Rate limit exceeded, try again after a while')::text,
      detail = json_build_object(
        'status',  420,
        'status_text', 'Enhance Your Calm')::text;
  END IF;

  INSERT INTO private.rate_limits (ip, request_at) VALUES (req_ip, now());
END;
  $$;
```

> Finally, configure the `public.check_request()` function to run on every serverless API request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, configure the `public.check_request()` function to run on every Data API request:
```

```sql
ALTER ROLE authenticator
  SET pgrst.db_pre_request = 'public.check_request';

NOTIFY pgrst, 'reload config';
```

> To clear old entries in the `private.rate_limits` table setup a [pg_cron](/guides/database/extensions/pg_cron) job to clean them up.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To clear old entries in the `private.rate_limits` table, set up a [pg_cron](/guides/database/extensions/pg_cron) job to clean them up.
```

</TabPanel>

<TabPanel id="use-additional-api-key" label="Use additional API keys">

Some applications can benefit from using additional API keys managed by the application **in addition to the [Supabase API keys](/docs/guides/api/api-keys)**. This is commonly necessary in cases like:

> - Applications that use the serverless API without RLS policies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Applications that use the Data API without RLS policies.
```

- Applications that do not use [Supabase Auth](/auth) or any other authentication system and rely on the `anon` role.

> <Admonition type="hint">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Admonition type="tip">
```

> Using the `apikey` header with the [Supabase API keys](/docs/guides/api/api-keys) is mandatory and not configurable. If you use additional API keys, you would have to distribute both the `anon` API key and your application's custom API key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the `apikey` header with the [Supabase API keys](/docs/guides/api/api-keys) is mandatory and not configurable. If you use additional API keys, you have to distribute both the `anon` API key and your application's custom API key.
```

</Admonition>

Outline:

- Your application requires the presence of the `x-app-api-key` header when the `anon` role is used to prevent abuse of your API.
- These API keys are stored in the `private.anon_api_keys` table, and are distributed independently.

> - Each request using the `anon` role, it will be blocked with HTTP 403 if the `x-app-api-key` header is not registered in the table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Each request using the `anon` role will be blocked with HTTP 403 if the `x-app-api-key` header is not registered in the table.
```

> Setup the table:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set up the table:
```

`set up` is the verb, `setup` is the noun

CREATE TABLE private.anon_api_keys (
  id uuid primary key,
  -- other relevant fields
);
```

Create the `public.check_request` function:

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION public.check_request()
  RETURNS VOID
  LANGUAGE plpgsql
  SECURITY DEFINER
  AS $$
DECLARE
  req_app_api_key text := current_setting('request.headers', true)::json->>'x-app-api-key';
  is_app_api_key_registered boolean;
BEGIN
  IF current_role <> 'anon' THEN
    -- not `anon` role, allow the request to pass
    RETURN;
  END IF;

  SELECT
    true INTO is_app_api_key_registered
  FROM private.anon_api_keys
  WHERE
    id = req_app_api_key
  LIMIT 1;

  IF is_app_api_key_registered IS TRUE THEN
    -- api key is registered, allow the request to pass
    RETURN;
  END IF;

  RAISE sqlstate 'PGRST' USING
    message = json_build_object(
      'message', 'No registered API key found in x-app-api-key header.')::text,
    detail = json_build_object(
      'status', 403)::text;
END;
  $$;
```

Finally, configure the `public.check_request()` function to run on every serverless API request:

```sql
ALTER ROLE authenticator
  SET pgrst.db_pre_request = 'public.check_request';

NOTIFY pgrst, 'reload config';
```

</TabPanel>

> <TabPanel id="hide-private-tables-functions" label="Hide private tables, views and functions">

Reviewer: Hm, this is no good. The right way to do this is:

```sql
REVOKE ALL ON TABLE tbl FROM anon, authenticated, service_role;
```

Otherwise users will blindly follow this `pre-request` and then blame us being insecure when they forget to add an `_` to their tables.

Reviewer: I'd suggest just removing this section

Author: Done.

  | -------- | ------------------ | ----------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
  | Table | `profiles` | `/rest/v1/profiles` | `profiles` |
  | View | `view` | `/rest/v1/view` | `view` |
  | Function | `create_profile()` | `/rest/v1/rpc/create_profile` | `rpc/create_profile` |
- You can create a function that checks the `request.path` prefix and raise an exception if its not meant to be used.

Create the `public.check_request` function. But, because this function is not meant to be called directly, you should name it suitably `public._check_request`:

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION public._check_request()
  RETURNS VOID
  LANGUAGE plpgsql
  SECURITY DEFINER
  AS $$
DECLARE
  req_path text := current_setting('request.path', true);
BEGIN
  -- in SQL, position 1 is the first character in the string
  IF position('_' in req_path) = 1 OR position('rpc/_' in req_path) = 1 THEN
    RAISE sqlstate 'PGRST' USING
      message = json_build_object(
        'message', 'This is a private object. Cannot be used directly.')::text,
      detail = json_build_object(
        'status', 404)::text;
  END IF;
END;
  $$;
```

> Finally, configure the `public._check_request()` function to run on every serverless API request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, configure the `public._check_request()` function to run on every Data API request:
```
